this is crazy i feel like i just
accelerated my aging overnight something
happened and it's really weird because
it's taking so much more time to sort of
bring my glow out and my skin feels dull
and i feel like dull energy wise and
this is not going to work for the amount
of things that i want to do in my life
so
let's say on average you have 60 60 000
thoughts in a day right if you are
stressed and you're sympathetic and
you're and you're feeling anxious and
your cortisol levels are higher it can
pop you out of ketosis
quickly which is super weird so up
regulating staying parasympathetic
is something that's very important to me
and then also managing my mind
my mindset
when you look at all these different
cultures and how they move exercise is
like a man-made
activity and it's sort of like processed
food
that's a bold statement
everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is naomi whittle known as
the indiana jones of wellness she's the
founder of reservage which was at one
point the fastest growing mid-sized
company in the nutritional supplement
industry she's also the former ceo of
twin lab and now the founder of simply
good fats additionally she's the new
york times best-selling author of glow
15 a science-based plan to lose weight
revitalize your skin and most
intriguingly invigorate your life
so basically reading your book i was
like all right this is essentially the
fountain of youth in the real world
which i love
talk to me about the foundations of
youth what can we really be doing right
now to
feel younger look younger what are the
keys
i think that it's it's about really
allowing our body to do what it
naturally wants to do and we live in an
unnatural world right there's so much
pollution
there's so much contamination in the
soil we
we struggle every day just to sort of
ward off the challenges that is our
environment and most of our health is
affected by what we can't see right so
it's the pollution that's in the air
that we're breathing inside of our house
it could be what's in the insulation i
mean there's so many factors
and for me
i was born in switzerland i was
literally born on a biodynamic farm so
that's like organic on steroids my dad's
a chemist my mother's an artist
and they were
obsessed with keeping me healthy like
they would move my stroller and my pram
like away from the street so i wouldn't
breathe in fumes and it's weird because
i had i was born with autoimmune
disorders so
i had already a struggle when i was
first born and what was my biggest
struggle was i was unable to sort of
process a lot of the contaminants that i
would be bringing into my body so i knew
intuitively at a young age that i needed
to help my body sort of like detox i
didn't sweat much i couldn't really
eliminate a lot of what was building up
and it created this fire and
inflammation and i was covered in eczema
it made me pay attention to things that
like most kids wouldn't i i always wore
clothing where you could never see my
skin and yet it's still totally screwed
with my life by i am was
always feeling unattractive it would
bleed it would pus it was very ugly so i
was like i'm dealing with this ugliness
that
hurts me like it physically hurts
and yet i know that
the organic food that i'm eating
the ways the products i'm putting on my
body have to be such that they don't
inflame it and so i was always sort of
chasing what would give me that sense of
energy because i had so much desire
inside of myself to sort of
reach for whatever it was like i was six
years old when i ran away from home and
i did it for the first time it wasn't
because my parents were like
mean or hurting me or anything it was
just this intense curiosity i wanted to
see what was out there
and i didn't want to be inhibited by my
biology really i was in my mid-20s when
i first went to okinawa
i didn't go to okinawa because
you know it's a beautiful park a
beautiful island off of japan i went
there because
there are a large group of centenarians
there more than as a proportional basis
than other parts of the world
and i knew that i couldn't just read a
book to sort of discover what was there
i had to go and touch and feel and see
with my own eyes
and when i got to okinawa i learned some
really interesting things
i learned that when i ordered a salad it
wasn't like the lettuce that we eat on
our salads it was filled with these like
super herb
rich nutrients that i had never
experienced before so i was eating like
all of this
parsley and all these different wild
herbs i had never had before and that
was their salad
or that pork was a really big part of
their diet and i didn't know that or
that when you sit down with them you
know they're gonna joke and laugh three
or four times more than we do and
they're always on their bikes it could
be a 90 year old woman and she's biking
around this constant like paleo movement
in a way right like we've taken sort of
our diets
back to where they used to be
in many ways and now there's an
opportunity for us to do that with
movement and exercise
and i learned about creating youth
inside of my body through these
different cultures these different
people and
that's to me the keys so the keys i
would say
are
this um
autophagy which we'll talk about
autophagy is
in greek it means auto self phagey to
eat so it's self cannibalization that's
number one
and i think number two is just
embracing
that joy whatever that means for you for
me you know for us like we love to
optimize and hack and find the best
performance that we can experience in
our life because that allows us to
accomplish what it is we want so i think
those two keys working with our own
biology
because our bodies have the answers like
we know
scientifically we can live to 120.
all right so you talked a lot about okay
we've got pollutants and we've got
things you can
avoid you've got things that you can do
you've got diet you've got exercises
this whole universe of stuff and what i
want to do hopefully in the next hour is
really tease this stuff out into things
that are hyper actionable so great um if
we were going to build our fountain of
youth from scratch so you've given us a
couple of key ingredients how do we
avoid the
tinfoil hat wearing sense of like trying
to avoid all of the pollutants and
everything
because i know part of your story of
curing the eczema you found this chinese
herb you ate it it actually really
helped it was very beneficial for your
skin but then later when you were trying
to get pregnant you realized that you'd
ingested a lot of heavy metal toxins
yeah so now you take the soil very
seriously and i thought oh my god like
if i had to go research where like
everything is coming from i'd lose my
mind yeah so how do you like start
making this simple for people i think
it's it's it is complicated and i hate
saying that right i want to tell us all
like it's it there's a simple way of
doing it um at the end of the day
if we can
find a couple of you know foods from our
farmers market that's grown locally that
can nourish us from like a functional
food perspective and then when you're
there maybe there are a couple of
one two three different stands that are
organic
and once you tap into those they can
become your friends i mean like these
are the people that are nourishing you
physically right so i try to buy 80 as
much as we can we buy from the farmers
market and we're friends with the people
at the farmers market so that to me if
they're organic that's a great place to
start and then you can optimize it by
really focusing on like the super herbs
cilantro parsley rosemary i mean any of
what makes plants super in particular
they're like it's like a super food so
an avocado is a super food these are
super herbs because they have such
nutrient density and then using those as
sort of like the foundation of what it
is that you're eating so pesto in my
house is not a side condiment it's not
something i add in it's a base right and
there are so many different types of
pestos so that's one way to
activate the youth inside of your cells
okay so now are you getting into
autophagy when you say actually all of
it everything that i'm speaking about
has different effects so if i'm going to
talk about a super herb it's going to
have a variety of different benefits to
your wealth right so let's dive into
those and so i'm i'm taking in the herbs
what am i getting exactly
so you're getting antioxidants you're
getting polyphenols
let's pause on polyphenols for a second
i think this is a big one you go deep
into it in the book it'd be great for
people to understand exactly what those
are okay and what they do for us so
polyphenols are
essentially like a supercharged
antioxidants so they have micronutrients
in them so polyphenols are found in red
wine
they're found in the grapes they're
found in the skins the seeds the stems
they're all over the place but what
they're so good at doing is really
helping your body to repair from a lot
of the damage the environmental damage
and they fight off that damage
so in my book i call them i have a
series of them that are called power
phenols because not only do they protect
us from all of that
junk but they also help our body to
truly repair itself which is why i love
them so much so that's resveratrol so
you can have a good glass of wine
there's this crazy beautiful fruit
in calabria italy called the citrus
bergamot fruit it's like a combination
of sort of a lemon and orange but it has
tons of polyphenols tons of flavonols so
when you eat this fruit
and i was taught to eat the white part
the pith you're getting all of these
flavonols and it's like jacking up your
autophagy so again that's um a great
that's a great one green tea
so you'll drink i'm sure a ton of matcha
and green tea when you're when you're in
japan and that's just filled with tons
of polyphenols and it's so powerful i
mean you get them in coffee you get them
in a lot of different places
okay so
we're getting our polyphenols our power
phenols how are we kicking off the
autophagy mechanism so you used a really
simple clean analogy um which is imagine
you cook a meal in your kitchen and then
you clean the kitchen up you take the
trash out it's all nice and clean you
sort of reset back to zero and that was
how you explained um what autophagy is
yes
give us a little bit more about what's
going on at the cellular level like what
that looks like
we've talked about it a little bit in
terms of fasting which is how i've
always heard it you're the first person
i've heard really go into there are
other ways to kick you into that other
than just intermittent fasting yes um so
it'd be really interesting to understand
a bit more about what's happening at the
cellular level and then how this stuff
is kicking that off so for me it came
out of necessity right i was in my late
30s and i
was on qvc all the time and i remember
one day i was getting my makeup done i
was like
this is crazy i feel like i just
accelerated my aging overnight something
happened and it's really weird because
it's taking so much more time to sort of
bring my glow out and my skin feels dull
and i feel like dull energy wise and
this is not going to work for the amount
of things that i want to do in my life
and i think for every single one of us
right
sometimes you can have this feeling of
oh my god i'm like held back by just
sort of this toxic feeling inside um and
i became really passionate about this
idea of
what is it at the cellular level that
will give me that energy back and i knew
that my cells
were either building like building up
you know through the protein and
different nutrients or they were
detoxing and this is very much the lame
and thought process i was just thinking
they're eliminating
crap right like my cells are either
building on themselves and they're
replicating or they're eliminating junk
and maybe they're dying off but i didn't
know that there was an actual biological
process that occurred so fast forward to
italy i'm in the orchard with this
brilliant phd dr elizabeth janda and she
opens up a citrus bergamot fruit shows
the white gives it to me i'm eating it
we go back to our lab we're drinking
this tea all day long the citrus tea i'm
like i love this tea but what's the deal
like i've never drank so much tea other
than when i was in japan where they were
just drinking green tea three four five
cups a day
and she was doing the same with the
citrus tea and she's like oh it's my
anti-aging secret
and
it activates my autophagy
what's that word
and i started to learn from her she
explained to me that this process is
something that we all have in every
single one of our cells it's almost like
a little doctor
inside of each of your cells that says
okay
time to recycle this part these
organelles need to be removed this needs
to be killed this needs to be
strengthened and so autophagy is like
this brilliance within our cells and
there's so many ways to activate it and
there are so many ways to deactivate it
you don't always want to keep it on
right like it's kind of like the ocean
back and forth
so she told me about it
and i came back to the u.s
and i was obsessed and i was on a
mission
and that was like five years ago
and i knew
when my when i looked at my skin and i
saw that i had experienced these
accelerated agers
and i looked older than i was and i
actually looked at a picture of my
mother at 37 years old i grabbed this
photo of her and i looked at a picture
of me and i looked so much older than
she did oh like this is really messed up
like i know i put a lot more stress on
myself
you know i travel around the globe like
on average eight times a year whoa yeah
i'm i'm on the go
um
so i'm dealing with a lot of that i have
four kids you know
built i was running you know twin lab
ceo of twin lab i had sold my company to
them
public company
so all of these factors
put stress
but still i shouldn't have been looking
that much older than my mother and so
that's when i got into activating
autophagy okay that's really interesting
and let's um sort of bring it down from
the scientific for a second because so i
heard you on bulletproof radio
and dave was talking about how wow your
skin really looks good in person and so
the second i saw you i was like
it really is fascinating seeing you up
close like truly your skin is phenomenal
so now becomes a question of what are
you doing on a daily basis you've talked
about things you put on your skin which
i thought was super weird but made me
want to go out and do it
um and you were talking about like
coffee grounds and all kinds of crazy
so
walk us through the things that you eat
and then walk us through the things that
you apply externally okay i
consume tons of super herbs tons of
power phenols okay um which is like
cacao and a lot of those things i eat a
ton of micro greens so that's like
broccoli sprouts
micro greens yes so like little sprouts
so when you go to japan you should be
taking sulforaphane which comes from the
broccoli sprout because it's an
incredible autophagy activator and
detoxifier so you're going to be in a
very
yeah you can take it in a supplement
form you can find it anywhere
sulforaphane um is is really awesome
okay so i take those foods those
supplements i personally um really
benefit from a ketogenic diet it reduces
the inflammation in my body there's
maybe what 15 or 20 percent of the
population that does well on a low
fat
carb rich diet but the rest of us just
are better off you know i'll very much
put myself in that camp um do you live
in ketosis like i love it yeah i only
got um really into it about a year and a
half ago myself personally i had
um maybe eight years ago one of my
translator had cancer and so we put him
on a ketogenic diet
with his cancer and that was many years
ago and that was based on thomas
seyfried's work and
one of my children my seven-year-old has
suffered from seizures so he's ketogenic
so he was ketogenic before i was
and a year and a half ago i was just
like
i have to figure out how
i
myself my family my mother i mean you
spoke about metabolic
disorders and you know metabolic
syndrome and
and obesity and morbidly obese
when we moved to this country my mother
developed metabolic syndrome
and
that has been the most one of the most
painful things for me personally because
i couldn't solve it for her
so a year and a half ago i interviewed
over 80 experts and i created a
documentary called the real skinny on
fat it's a free documentary it's online
and
i got so inspired by these genius minds
that i went ketogenic and i haven't gone
back wow so if i took your blood right
now blue ballpark where would your
ketones read
probably like one to one point two and
you stay there all the time yeah
the biggest impact on our ketone levels
are usually it's usually our mindset
right
yes go deeper on that what do you mean
meditation so meditate so if you're
sympathetic
if you're in a state of synthetic
nervous system nervous system but it's
also related to mindset so let's say on
average you have 60 60 000 thoughts in a
day right if you are stressed and you're
sympathetic and you're and you're
feeling anxious and your cortisol levels
are higher it can pop you out of ketosis
quickly which is super weird so up
regulating staying parasympathetic
is something that's very important to me
and then also managing my mind my
mindset
wow that's really interesting i've never
heard anybody say that before uh i am
such a believer that the mind is
terrifyingly powerful that i'm i'm very
open to believing that so um one i've
suffered from anxiety just massively uh
i won't say that i've noticed an impact
um from diet so when i go hardcore
ketosis which i do a few times a year
i'm always high fat uh essentially zero
carb moderate protein um but a few times
a year i'll go like deep into ketosis
i've never noticed any sort of
correlation between whether i'm feeling
anxious or stressed and my levels but
that's interesting just because i
haven't paid attention it's entirely
possible that some of those fluctuations
it's real um i was on the phone with dr
dominic diagofino
two days ago he's published papers on
anxiety
and
ketosis so there is real data proving
that it can reduce anxiety and
shift your your state
okay so
um
that'll believe i just haven't heard
that it actually affects your ketone
readings which is interesting okay so
you try to stay in a parasympathetic
state yes uh to keep your ketones
elevated yes and not all the time right
like there's a place where you want you
want to be sympathetic right there are
times you just don't want to be
chronically in that okay so to bring
that all together and then i want to
keep going down the list so
obviously what we're eating really
matters we've touched on that a little
bit staying in the parasympathetic so
what we'll call rest and digest or what
is often referred to as rest and digest
you're doing meditation
you don't do a ton of exercise at least
as far as i understand which i love yeah
i hate exercise i mean like there's data
now showing us that just twitching like
if we were sitting here twitching
that's the kind of movement that can
really impact our health like it's crazy
you know there's like any sort of micro
moves using like once an hour doing
little things i mean you look at all
these different cultures and how they
move exercises like a man-made
activity and it's sort of like processed
food
that's a bold statement i'm gonna clip
the out of that
uh okay so talk to me more about that so
if exercise is like processed food
meaning you can do too much too hard in
ways that aren't beneficial it's
unnatural
in the ways that we've
made it right so we go to the gym we go
to our gym we do certain moves i mean i
love to weight train i'm weight training
right now like i'm getting ready for the
front cover of my next book and i'm
ecstatic about that
but
that's an unnatural process
so
what we've done is we've taken out
movement
these everyday natural moves that really
are good for our body
and we've made it we've
compartmentalized it in such a way that
it it's not necessarily giving us the
bang for the buck so what's the sort of
ultimate fountain of youth style workout
i think it's different for every single
person so in my book we talk about
resistance training and that could just
be your own body weight
we also talk about interval training so
what i'm doing right now is a lot of
weight training
but it's not what i do normally i focus
on
strengthening my glutes because they're
such important muscles
that really sort of give that cascade of
of energy throughout our body
specifically the glutes or the entire
set of leg muscles primarily the glutes
because so many of us are quad dominant
so i really like to focus on that
i've been trained to
do things like skipping
i do a lot of skipping backward forward
i like to be outside as much as possible
and there's new data that shows us
if you can be looking at water
and outside when you're moving when
you're exercising
the benefits are so much greater for me
it could be very different than what's
what's right for you
and um i just find that the less we have
like specific boundaries on on movement
the better off we are and the more our
bodies really benefit from it
do you have ways for people to
um judge what's working what's not
working to notice the patterns because
like usually people are going to say
well how do you feel yes the problem is
you can be fatigued from doing a workout
that three days from now actually would
be very beneficial and you probably
should stick with it um but because it
made you so tired or it made your muscle
sore like what do you tell people to to
pay attention to i think it's about how
you perform in your life like i have
um
so much
desire inside of my mind to do so many
things and life to me is like every
moment i want
that i i want to optimize every single
hour so i don't want the energy that's
in my body to hold me back
so what i'm paying attention to is
how long am i feeling good in the day so
i want to be able to have a 16 to 18
hour day and i'm mostly paying attention
to my thoughts so if i start to have
negative thoughts i'm starting to beat
myself up or whatever it is i'm like oh
that's
fatigue going on because my my state i'm
not shifting it i mean we talk about
tony robbins like i fell in love with
him probably when i was a teenager and
used his work to really guide me and i
developed that ability to create state
very very quickly so if i can't maintain
some people about that it's so
interesting you really
um go so seamlessly back and forth
between what you eat how you exercise
and how you think i think that's really
powerful
and hopefully people are paying
attention it's exactly why i do a show
on mindset and a show on
health you absolutely must do both
talk to people about state change i
think this is super important the reason
i can shift my my state the reason i
have the ability to do what i want to do
is because of my love for health
so my love for health is about really
helping people myself my family you
anyone have a better version of their
own life so they can reach their
potential right and we can do that in so
many different ways with different
patterns and systems
but it starts here no question
the thoughts the feelings the beliefs
that we have are everything and then the
food the movement
all of the other stuff sort of supports
that
so talk to me how do you wrangle in your
own mindset so one obviously is the
awareness of oh maybe i'm fatigued or
something because i keep coming back to
negative thoughts but even that is a
level of self-awareness to understand
that the negative thoughts aren't
necessarily driven by reality which is
where i think most people get hurt they
think that negative thoughts are real
and that's why they recur so much and so
oh i should beat myself up over this
because i really am a loser or whatever
not realizing actually no there's these
other triggers that cause that and that
becomes something to be aware of in and
of itself that the negative thoughts
related to something else
so okay you catch yourself you're in a
negative spiral what do you do
so what i do is i change my physiology
what i learned from tony all those years
ago right so i learned about nlp
neuro-linguistic programming right so
the words you use matter the words we
use matter our physiology our body the
way we hold our body our breath
all these things matter so much
and
for me
i felt so badly about myself because i
was covered
in this fire this inflammation of eczema
and i'm moving from another country and
moving to the u.s although it was an
english-speaking country
i was
like i am painfully truly painfully shy
and so it was such a culture shock
moving to this country
um
i went through so much that i had to
just figure out like
how i was going to
get through the day
and and
live my life and so i used quotes
you know if you can dream it then you
can truly make it happen and i learned
that my subconscious was everything so
if i could start working with my
subconscious at a very young age which i
did
through meditations at night um i do it
to this day then you do guided
meditation i do got so i do guided
meditations i love it i mean i'm just
every night i clean my brain
okay that's a really interesting way to
say it so um and i'll even loop that
back because you use the cleaning
analogy for autophagy and now we sort of
have the same thing happening in your
mind which is really interesting it's a
huge theme that plays in the book
um so let's uh ride the autophagy horse
a little bit more here which i think is
super super interesting so this idea of
cleaning things up of getting rid of the
negative thoughts getting rid of the
broken cells
and getting back to a state of sort of
optimal performance so one thing we
haven't talked about um i know you talk
about intermittent fasting i'd love to
hear about that i'd love to hear about
your protein cycling i love to hear
about timing right how does all that
work my favorite topic so
um we can start with intermittent
fasting so for me i've been fasting for
25 years and i've always been doing it
for health reasons people fast for
religious reasons all different reasons
i do it for health
and
it is to me my favorite tool in my
toolbox uh so i did tons of juice fasts
water fasts everything under the sun so
i started to get into intermittent
fasting then
loved it had so much more energy okay
that's what i was gonna ask me say you
love it yeah not eating sucks almost
universally yes so what's the love part
um the energy the mental focus like it
just allowed me to
benefit from my day by 20 30 percent
more so i that's what made me love it
and then the research has really blown
up over the past couple of years around
intermittent fasting and now we know so
much more about it and so if you can add
two more hours where it becomes an 18
hour fast it's exponential the benefits
just think of it this way
when you're a sugar burner you have 2
000 calories
in your fuel tank
i use 2100 calories every day just
regular when you're using your fuel tank
that's made up of fat you have access to
40 000 calories
so like
the thought around when you need to eat
when you're hungry is just so different
because you have a massive
reserve but i like to intermittent fast
every other day and so that
helps my production of ketones it helps
activate the autophagy and autophagy is
really just going in there and cleaning
up
why don't you do it every day
based on like the world's top
researchers on the topic
their recommendation was to do it every
other day you can do it every day if i
do a five day water fast i'm activating
it very deeply you do it through
exercise you do it when you sleep
you mention the timing piece so timing
as we all know matters like when i don't
think most people know that really not
in food yeah like they definitely get it
in other areas but even even timing for
me is very new i used to think it was
total yeah and then because
lisa's gone through such catastrophic
microbiome issues somebody was like have
you ever tried not eating for three
hours before you go to bed
i thought
why would that matter like that didn't
even make sense to me but we thought
well we'll try anything at this point
and that was a huge that may be the
biggest breakthrough for her was just
love it stopping eating sometimes four
or five hours before she goes to bed and
it makes a huge difference
so one what is your window how far do
you stop eating before you go to bed if
that's part of your timing
and then how do you think about timing
in terms of macronutrients okay
so the reason i care about timing is
every cell in our body not only does it
activate autophagy but it has a little
clock
in it right so that rhythm that
circadian rhythm
that won the nobel prize the year after
autophagy did so in 2017 and so if
the idea of when i sleep and for how
many hours that's just tapping into my
own
rhythms and those rhythms really have an
impact on our health so the timing of
when i'm fasting that every other day
again it goes back to that rhythm and um
when you eat your macronutrients like a
big part of this is fat first because
it's activating your ketones and if
you're going to eat carbs carbs last
that's so counterintuitive i know
because most people would just say oh if
you eat carbs like you're going to get
fat right yeah and i'm not a propo i'm
not a big believer in in lots of carbs
obviously because most of us just can't
tolerate them okay so why carbs late why
do that last so if you're going to have
carbs have them late because for someone
who likes to exercise a lot it can help
with the rest and also
recovery for the for you know your for
building of your muscles and recovery is
such a huge part of movement and
exercise so recovery is like the secret
sauce
i i see it and if you eat your carbs
late it helps you with recovery it helps
you to sleep
again not a big believer in carbs right
it's an interesting statement though to
say that it helps you with the recovery
but i'm not a big believer so um one do
you take in any carbs i'm assuming you
do because you have vegetables and then
some of the things that are giving you
powerful nulls i'm guessing we're also
getting some amount of even though it's
probably fiber rich but you're getting
some carbohydrate there absolutely so
i'm so
i guess how i would communicate that is
there is that small percentage of the
population that can
thrive
on a high carb diet i mean think about
the japanese how much rice do they eat
they're processing it differently so
that's why i'm couching what i'm saying
you know for the individuals that do
benefit from carbohydrates then fat
first carbs last for people like me i'm
going to get small quantities of carbs
in the vegetables i eat but the
small amount that i get is throughout
the day so i don't believe i've never
believed in a one size fits all
talk to me about protein cycling
what is that how do you do it so you
protein cycle in order to again just
sort of activate the youth inside of
your cells
so which is activating it the
restriction or the giving it's it's a
little bit like muscle confusion you
know how you can do different movements
different exercises it's sort of
confusing the metabolism a little bit
which i love to do it keeps it on its
toes and you get a lot of benefit that
way
so on the days when you have low protein
so a low day is a day where you're
intermittent fasting and you have low
protein you take about five percent of
your calories from protein and then the
day that's a high day so every other day
in glow 15 you're going back and forth
um a high day you'll have the regular
amount of protein that you would
normally get
so for me it's like 45 to 50 grams of
protein on a high day okay and i'll
reduce that to about five percent of my
calories on a low day um
and and you
i believe you know you can get
accustomed to this sort of like
confusion that your body goes through
and it's all for
more youth
more energy more focus more joy give me
a couple meals that you eat on a day
where your protein is five percent yeah
like what is that good question so
that's the day where i don't consume
like any
specific proteins and i'm going to get
my protein from the vegetables that i'm
eating so i'll eat primarily vegetarian
and we have like a whole slew of of the
different recipes so walk me through um
we're on a low day we're basically
vegetarian yeah but i'm
racking my brain to think how you um
what you end up eating there that
doesn't just become carb central right
so
we're going to have a lot of oil yep
we're going to have lots of oil lots of
nuts i love peeling nuts peely nuts yeah
peeling nuts are super delicious they're
filled with tons of good fat
i eat lots of avocados so like even we
have these egg dishes um called our egg
15s and or avocado glows do you leave
the egg white in one so like on on on a
low day we'll use just the egg yolk
really interesting yeah um
now talk to me about skin care on the
outside okay what can i slather on
that's going to give me skin as amazing
now but that's for real now i'm not even
trying to pay you a compliment that is
um pure jealousy driving that comment
like how does one get to that point so
we've talked about the ingesting and now
let's
lather things on so our body is
consuming 60 of what we put on it and
i have been so humbled and so privileged
to literally
travel all over the globe and learn from
some of the most brilliant minds i i
brought collagen as an ingestible beauty
supplement into the u.s market because
15 years ago i was in singapore in
indonesia and malaysia i'm like my god
these women are like beyond and i know
genetically that they have great skin
but there's something else that's going
on and they were eating donkey hide
burgers and soup and bone broths and
ingesting all of these collagen
supplements
so
for me
what's going on on the outside because i
have suffered with so much inflammatory
eczema on the inside i kind of had to
become my own expert and i couldn't
slather too much stuff on because it
just like screwed me up
so i looked at how do i get the most
beauty i can on the outside
by putting things inside my body or
using a dry brush to activate my
lymphatic system i mean it's exactly
what it sounds like i wish i had one
it's a brush that that has sort of like
um harder bristles
and you put it on your skin and you
brush toward your heart
i do it every day like if you were in my
hotel room you'd see i have my dry brush
there you'd also see i have epsom salts
so i take baths non-stop and i know it's
a european thing and i know it's an
asian thing but beauty outer beauty is
built in many parts of the world in the
bathtub
so getting your magnesium
which impacts 600
reactions in your body getting your
magnesium in the bath is a really great
way to have beautiful skin so we're
absorbing 60 percent of what we put on
our body
the key in my mind
is reducing the amount of chemicals that
we're putting on so most women
just by accident just through regular
products put on over 500 chemicals a day
like 500 plus
into their bodies
so if we can just reduce that number
just like we can reduce our negative
thoughts
our skin wants to be luminous do you
wear any masks or anything oh all the
time
so
i love love love hyaluronic acid
it's a hydrating
moisture grabbing
oil that i put on my face all the time i
just came out with my my skin care that
i've been working on forever like too
long to mention
it's called omi outside meets inside so
it's about activating the autophagy in
our skin i worked with the worlds like
leading um
he's a dermatologist
dr richard wang who's also an autophagy
expert and we gave him like 300
different ingredients like what
activates autophagy the best in the skin
and he said it was
ceramides which is a good essential fat
he said it was green tea
you know caffeine
he said it was a special asparagus
citrus bergamot fruit resveratrol so i
made a
complex and it's in my entire line and
it's like a cream it's serums it's
cleansers it's moisturizers it's all
sorts of different things all right so
now i'm really gonna make you give it
some detail it's bedtime and
walk me through all the things you put
on your face
whether it's washing taking the makeup
off like
every last bit of it so
i'm very aware of the quality of the
water that we put on our face like i've
spoken with a lot of um brilliant
toxicologists dermatologists cell
biologists
that
teach us
you know what the water is and how many
pollutants are in that water you have to
be really aware of so i start with using
the cleanest water that i can get my
hands on so i'll use all different types
of water sometimes i'll use spring water
sometimes i'll use sparkling water
there's uh
like online on amazon there's all
different types of waters that you can
buy and you can spray your face with
them everyone waters things like that so
that's how you start your routine i love
to start it that way
yes with water and then just depends on
the type of cleanser i'll use oil
cleansers because
at my age my skin is leaking moisture
right so it's there's so much moisture
coming out of it i want to really
support it and nourish it and i want to
activate the autophagy so it depends
on what the day is but basically i look
in the mirror and i p and i'm aware like
i know
if i need to be focusing more on like a
lymphatic drainage
for my skin because you're looking puffy
absolutely yeah yeah so i'm always
fighting that so i do um like little
facial massages and i'll use the mct oil
i'll use a clean i'll use my cleansers
to do that
all sorts of different fun things now
let's talk about you said caffeine at
one point in passing i've always been
told that caffeine is terrible for your
skin
and i'm talking drink caffeine well you
have to drink a lot of caffeine you have
to drink several
three to four cups for it to have an
effect on your hydration which is what
everybody worries about but it is a
vasodilator and so it can add you know
some of the benefits of the tightening
and
energizing effect of the caffeine from
drinking it from drinking it but also
from putting it on your skin so that's
why you know i love the scrubs that use
um the coffee grounds in it
yeah
very very interesting
okay
um so
if you had to say what has the bigger
impact
i'm gonna make you choose between three
things you're not gonna choose between
diet
mindset
or external products that we cleanse and
rub on what's the the most sort of youth
invigorating
mindset hands down interesting
wow that's
that's really interesting especially
because it's the the part of all this
that you don't sell which i really
respect by the way yeah yeah and and for
me you know there's so many contrarian
perspectives in in my book i mean even
writing a book on autophagy that no one
could even pronounce i mean i started
this
several years before the nobel prize in
medicine was one it was one in 2016. i
just had the privilege this past
december of interviewing the nobel prize
winner dr yosanorio sumi when i was in
tokyo
i was brought to tears from what he
shared but it is about the mind
everything comes back to that and so he
was drawing a correlation between
autophagy and mindset absolutely you're
activating autophagy through so many
different things it's not just about the
food it's not just about
sleeping and sleeping with your own
rhythms i mean there's
the mind is so powerful
on the activation of autophagy and
different things and he's really talking
about
intercellular communications right so
he's been he spent his entire career
studying yeast but he's a powerful
entrepreneur like what brought him
to this discovery that can change
millions and millions and millions of
people's lives is being
the mind of a man who
recognized that he had to go in his own
unique direction in order to
survive really he had
he was malnourished as a child
his mother had tuberculosis and he
dreamt of being a scientist and
everybody was in the world of chemistry
and he was like oh
maybe i'll go into this new field called
cellular biology and then everyone was
studying these areas
and he decided i'm going to study
autophagy and there were like no studies
out there 30 years ago he did the study
took him three years
today since he won the nobel prize
000 studies are done on an annual basis
he's changed the world
by being
an entrepreneur who who paid attention
to his mindset
wow that's incredible
where can people find you online where
can they find the book
so um the book's all over it's on amazon
this is our our brand new soft cover so
it's just been a year and i'm very
excited that it's out in softcover the
book can be found on amazon my website
naomi whittle.com
we're just starting to get really active
on youtube so
going all over the world sharing recipes
functional foods nutrients
different types of movement beauty you
know hacks and just the things that make
us feel good and have a better life i
love that
all right
if people could only make one change
and it would have the biggest impact on
their health what one change would you
ask them to make oh so hard what one
change
um
it would be
to focus on
gratitude
and finding that
on a daily basis
nice that's amazing
guys
we could have gone into a hundred topics
it is really extraordinary the number of
things that she can speak very
powerfully about i highly encourage you
to check out the book to dive into her
world it really is extraordinary naomi
thank you so much for coming on the show
that was such a privilege
guys if you haven't already be sure to
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you